Okay, so we're recording now. It is Wednesday the 2nd of December 2020 and at 11 o'clock
in the morning. My name is Paul Hunt and what's your name?
Dawn Gareth. And where are you today Dawn?
In my flat in Newport. Newport. And so just to start with, can you
just say a little bit about who you live with and where you live?
Hello, I'm my own in Newport. I work for Carderpeet First. I'm going to talk to houses, very
uh, bosses for the houses because of the health passport. The health passport is the name
what you're known as, your date of birth and all stuff like that.
So that's the stuff you do for work, is it? Yes. And do you have a partner at the moment?
Yes, I do. But he's not with me today. His name is George Lanton. We are engaged. We've
been engaged since my birthday last year. We've been together for five years.
Oh, quite a long time then. Yeah. So I guess I think that I've been with you since about whatever.
So mention, I suppose, the fact that you were one of the first people we interviewed at the
start of all of this. Yes. And so I suppose we'll make reference to that at the start,
but can you tell me, were you shielding at all or not when we had the first lockdown? Yes and no.
Answer that question correctly. Let me, yes and let me know. The reason because I live on my own.
Yeah. And I got to go down to the shop. I got to go see my sister, but I kept my two meters from her
and they go in and out at all. But then I came straight back to my house. And I was like,
go straight back to my flat. Okay. So back in March and all of this kicked off, how did you feel?
When all of this kicked off, I felt nervous and anxious and all stuff like that at first. Then it
felt okay. Doing online stuff and all. I'm glad we got the tablet for work,
but I'm using my phone, but nevermind that.
As well as that, I did miss George not being with me for the first lockdown and for the second
lockdown as well. We did miss each other and he missed my birthday and they had
offered an app, Google, whatever you want to call it. What is it again?
You can speak to it. Oh, what do you call it? Oh, my brain's gone.
Google. Not Google. Alexa. Oh, right. Okay. Like a smart speaker thing. Yeah.
And how have you found that using that? Okay. Okay. We set the alarms for work at 6.80 in the morning.
Sometimes it's hard for me to do food shopping. Sometimes it's even hard for me to do cleaning
and all. But it's quite handy to have it now and again to listen to like state of the crop music.
So you mentioned that you've missed, obviously, miss George when you had lockdown. Was there any
talk about you moving in together at all doing that? We're not moving in together now
because of the benefits issue. Okay. Would you be worse off or something? Is it? Yeah, it would be
maybe worse off if we moved in together. Oh, so how does that affect your plans? Obviously,
you're engaged right now. How would that affect your ability if you got married to live together?
It will affect it a lot, but I don't know much. It will affect it. But it'd be cadence and allowance
and all stuff like that. You know, so it'd be what? Sorry. No, no, sorry. Would the benefits
situation, if it wasn't for that, would you have moved in with him by now? Yeah, I would have,
but because he's in the complex, yeah, like sort of complex with other people.
I can't at the moment. Is it sheltered accommodation? Is it? Yeah.
I see. So going back to March, did you think it would still be going on this long?
I thought it won't be going on too long if you know what I mean, but I'm pleased now
coming out with these not relation things and I will allow it. I definitely will allow the
ejection. Yeah, because they announced that this morning, didn't they, that it's got been approved?
Yeah, I did know that. I missed out, but I turned over to something else I did.
So obviously you work with kind of people first. Did you know how you were going to be able to do
your job when it first started back in March? We started come together in March, so we did
we did loads of stuff on live, holding around and all, so because the come together project
did finish till October anyhow. And this new project which I'm doing now is about health,
so it's a different subject and this one's till March next year. Okay.
Did you find it, how did you find having to work from home remotely then? We did first, but I got
used to it, but with this new project I need to go up, because of this new project what we're doing
now, I need to, what I feel like I need to do is go out and talk to, instead of doing online,
is go out and meet and talk about this new project to start, head
the bosses, the top bosses like Dick, Reg, Dimensions, you name it, you know,
even the assembly members, you name it, I go talk to them, because we got funding from
public health files and we have online meetings and all on Thursday at 9.30 till
like 11.00, except for the other Thursday, but we still meet Thursdays at 9.30 till 10.00, or then
you know, sorry if I keep it on. No, no, that's fine, so you know,
what were the biggest differences for you between, you know, working normally in an office with people
and having to do it online in your house? In the office I know what I was doing and I was out more,
more, in the house I sometimes get tired a lot and not,
wasn't not interested, but I found it weird being on my own, does that make any sense?
No, yeah that makes sense, yeah, so you, you may be, not putting words in your mouth, but
you found it difficult not being around other people? Yeah, yeah, because I'm used to being
out and about more and I'm in more, that's the only straight thing about it. And so I,
it's worth mentioning I suppose that I've worked with you before, like I've done a couple of times,
is there anything that, where you think that you need support from someone that you haven't been
able to get? Not really, it's just I'm, to be honest and truthful, sometimes I am lazy to
tidy the flat up and all in that respect, but in supporting ways I got loads of support off work,
you know, with the tablet and all stuff like that. I understand where they're coming from,
they're coming from, if you know what I'm saying, they look for our wellbeing sort of thing,
our stress sort of thing, but
because I have been tested and all stuff like this, I wish I could have been tested, but
because I have got none of the symptoms, which that's why, thank God,
I'm pleased about.
And is it a worry that you could catch it at all, or are you worried about that?
Not really, I'm not all that worried if I could catch it, if I do catch it, it may be mild,
and that's, that's why
Wales are not doing, like London is doing, testing everybody in care homes,
they should do it for care homes in Wales. I think for people who's elderly, who've got
dementia and all, they need to do it in Wales as well as England. So we need to do that.
I would like to be tested just to know if I have it or I have got it, if no one from my mind
arrests, so to say.
Yeah, yeah, I quite like that.
Well, so you said you live on your own?
Yes.
During the first lockdown, did you see anyone at all?
Only my sister, I went up to, I went down the shop and then up to her house. I stayed outside
and just not on the door. And I kept, with her steps out to the front door, I kept them,
it's like two meters sort of thing. I sat on the wall, she sat on the chair. So that's
sort of the two meters, if you know what I'm saying.
Yeah, yeah, what did you talk about with her?
Just general stuff, how she is and how she's coping and all stuff like that.
So, you know, at least I have a sister, only at the wrong sort of thing I'm pleased about.
How did you feel having to live on your own for so long?
I sort of used to it, but I did miss George, I did miss him.
And how did you keep in touch with George?
Through WhatsApp, phone in, blue messenger, you know, we kept it in our way, so to say.
And how did he cope through it? I don't know.
And how did he cope through it? Obviously, you said he lived in accommodation with other people.
So how was he finding it compared to you?
He found it okay, but sometimes he said, because he thinks it is mental,
I don't say mental health problems, but he has mental health, sort of mental health problems.
But he's thinking, oh, it's the cigarettes down my body and all stuff like that, because he can't
go to number two properly, so he's dreaming it on cigarettes. Which is
understandable, which, you know, it's all in his mind. So do you understand what I'm saying?
Do you understand what I'm saying? Yeah, I understand.
And I'm trying to listen to him and reassuring me he's not dying and all stuff like this,
you name it. Which is quite difficult sometimes.
Were you able to talk to anyone else then about what George was going through?
I only work online with Sue and all because they understand George as well as I do.
So you felt like you had someone else to talk to? Yeah.
And so, thinking of like practical things like going shopping, how did you manage to go shopping
during the first lockdown? My sister. Your sister did the shopping for you?
She did it. She picked some stuff up for me normally because Darren worked for the
card of presses. Oh, who's Darren? My sister's partner. Oh, okay.
And he got a car. So he drove me and my sister to go shopping once.
And we used these scanners in Tesco once. They were the easiest to go in March because
the first lockdown. But because we were in the car, we were okay. That's only like a small little
bubble. Then we did online shopping sort of thing. If you know what I mean?
So you didn't go to many shops during lockdown then? Not all that many. If I did,
I did go out and go into town maybe once or twice, but I didn't go too far, you know,
down to Cardiff sort of thing. Yeah. And how did you find that experience going out during lockdown?
We were the first with the, you know, I didn't wear the mask of firsts at all.
Oh, you didn't, did you? No, not at first. How come? Because I got my last one.
Oh, okay. I think they did it to the altar quite recently,
if I remember. So I have been wearing them now, but because I got my last one, I got careful
by breathing as well. Yeah. I mean, how did you, how do you find wearing a mask? I hate them.
I don't like them, but I know why you got to do it. That's the case. If you got the invite,
you know, got this, wherever you want to call it. I know why. You go in the shop,
we go in the taxi, definitely go in on a bus, but I have seen people with these passes
have been attacked on buses, which is quite good.
Really? You feel safe on buses when other people are wearing the masks? Yeah. Yeah.
And how do you find it talking to other people when they're wearing a mask?
Weird. Definitely weird. Weird in what way? You can't see them talk properly. You know they are
talking, because you can hear them talking, but it's difficult to hear them now and again.
How does that make you feel?
I'm trying to think about that. I don't know. Oh, that old are weird? No. No. Oh, that's good.
I'm thinking about that.
And another thing, actually we'll come back to that. When the lockdown first finished,
how did you feel knowing that you could go and see people again? I was pleased. I was happy.
I could go and see George, you know, and George could come up and stay here,
which he did do, you know. So you bubbled with George, did you? Yeah, I bubbled with George. I
bubbled with my sister, you know, because my sister's only live up the road and I've been
seeing her mum now and again.
And how has your mother coped through all of it?
She's, oh, how can I put it? She wears a mask nearly 24 hours, so she put, she got in mind
and sort of thing. She's scared in the way not to take the mask off. She does take the mask off
when she's up on the air and she takes it off when she's back home, but she don't take it off
when she's in town or like that. I do. Well, I'm not going to the shops or anything like that,
and I'm outside. I leave my mask off. You know what I'm saying?
Oh, mum, is he upset? To me. Okay.
I know it's difficult to put it into words, so to say. No, no, I understand what you mean.
So, I want to go back a little bit and talk about George a second. Is that okay?
Yeah, that's fine.
How did you cope during lockdown with not being, like the physical side of relationship? I know
you could take that however you want, you know, hugging someone, just being able to be close to
someone. How did you find not being able to do that?
We didn't. I was a naughty girl. When we had the first lockdown, that felt so difficult,
and when the lockdown finishes, I was pleased. So, we did it. We did it. We did it.
That felt so difficult, and when the lockdown finishes, I was pleased. So, we did it.
First, we got back to mine.
Oh, sorry. I think you broke up a little bit then, Dawn.
It's very part that it was. I'll bring you back later.
Okay. So, what were you saying then?
I was saying the first lockdown was quite difficult, but when the first lockdown
finishes and he could come up to mine, we did hug and kiss then.
But did you find it difficult not having that contact with him?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. At first, because we couldn't see each other at all.
Oh, sorry.
Was that the longest you'd been without seeing him?
I'm a poor whore.
George tried to go through to my phone, that's all.
I said, is that the longest period you've been away from George?
Yes. Yes. I will bring you back to second off my phone.
It's been a long time.
Pardon?
Are you talking to George or Paul right now?
You.
Me, is it? Okay. You're going to ring me back to you?
No, I'll ring George back.
Oh, it's okay. Sorry. Getting confused.
When we first met, I would ring him straight back.
Okay. So did you feel lonely at all during lockdown?
A little bit lonely, but because I had my sister up the road, I did.
She had her partner and her boy to be.
Yeah.
Her partner and her boy to be.
And I felt all the old sort of things in that way.
I told her so.
In the mean way, in the nicest way.
I understand.
Has all of this affected your mood and how you feel about things in general?
No, not really. A little bit at the end, so it's known again, but not.
Not.
I don't feel all I have, so to say.
Now, what's the one thing you've missed during the last eight months?
Is there anything you've missed that you would really like to be able to do?
Meeting people and talking to assembly members and all stuff like that.
That's what I miss now.
So partly a job and just being able to see people, is it?
Yeah. And tell them about the health passports, the new job I'm doing now
which is, you know, and we got, you know, I know we got to do it online at the moment,
but hopefully before long we can, you know, go out and meet people.
Yeah, it'll be a few more months, I suspect.
Yeah, for me.
What was I going to ask? Sorry, oh yes. So,
do you, have there any, obviously you've mentioned George, but in terms of like your friends,
have you been able to stay in touch with them?
Sometimes on the web or WhatsApp.
Except for Georgia, I have tried to, no wonder times Georgia. So I kept in contact with Eddie,
our old phone, blue messenger, WhatsApp, Wayne, blue messenger.
And, oh that's the thing, I can leave a voice message for him about that job.
I can tell him no.
I think he will like that. Because it will fit my benefits.
Oh yes, yes. Always a problem that, isn't it?
Yeah, at the moment, because I'm doing 10 hours, I can't do the, because this one's up to March,
and your one's like 15 hours, it will fit my benefits.
The new job, will make up for it, will fit my benefits if I do too.
Yeah, oh that's fair enough, that's understandable.
So I go like, no thank you, but no thank you.
With like friendships and maybe groups,
has there been any online things you've been able to do, like quizzes or
people having sing-alongs and stuff like that?
I know I got on my tablet, the Insight app, where you talk about Paul from Inrate.
I've been on it maybe once or twice. I need to get on it because I need to talk to
the bosses of the houses for that, because then they know what I'm talking about.
At the moment, I'm quite, I guess not stuck,
it won't let me get on, because every time I put the password in, it's not recognizing it or
something, or I'm doing something wrong. But I'm like, by my head, I get a bit more sometimes.
So I go get on it, because they told me off.
But it sounds like maybe you haven't been interacting with people too much on Zoom or Teams then?
For work, yes. Teams, because we work on Teams with work colleagues and all, stuff like that.
Yeah, as well as for Zoom, we do stand-up speaking out meetings, so we do that on Zoom.
That's the only two I'm doing at the moment. I know I need to do more,
but it's just finding the time to do it.
I go somewhere inside that somewhere and I don't know how.
That's how I see you, Christian.
Yes, sort of. Obviously, you mentioned you hate wearing a face mask and things.
How have you found following all of the different rules? Do you think you've always understood them?
I understood the reason being why you go in face masks in shops and taxis and buses and all.
But when you are outside walking, I thought you don't need to wear a face mask.
That's the other side of things.
If you know what I'm trying to say, but when you come back out from a shop or anything like that,
I don't mind doing that. I understand why.
There's nothing that you've wondered or I'm not sure what I'm supposed to do in this situation?
No, no, no. Except for now and again, but other times, no, no.
Have you had support from work or someone else to understand those rules?
I've been looking around on Facebook, Low Disability Wales has been sending them an easy read
as far as they do the video thing about it. I do understand why, yes.
Oh, hello.
Let your phone go in.
Sorry, it's only me and half.
You're trying to get a hold of me.
He really wants to speak to you, doesn't he?
Oh, can I let him know I'm on video call on the net?
Yeah, you can do that.
Okay.
Hello.
Oh, no. Sorry about that.
I said two minutes.
We're nearly done, don't worry.
So what's the, do you think there's been any good things that come out of the last few months?
These calculations now, which goes proof, which I'm pleased about, but it is
in the virus, as I said, all right, to stop you out of the virus.
Yes, yeah, that's a very good thing. I was thinking more sort of like, you know,
some people think that it's good, like, so like me, for example, I don't have to drive to go to
work anymore. I'm saving a lot of money on petrol.
Other people feel it's been quite useful because they get to spend more time at home with their
families, not traveling. Is there anything you found that actually you quite like about the way
things are right now?
No, no, it's the opposite.
It's the opposite for me. I prefer to be out than about, Paul. You should know that by now.
I used to be an out of my person. I'd be, I don't know, like,
Monday or Wednesday or Friday, but if I'm working, I like to be out working, not in working.
You spent quite a lot of time at home in the last two months. How was that?
How do you now think about your home?
I want to get out.
I want to get out, so to say.
I'll say that in the new year, hopefully, I will be moved from Newport to Cardiff.
Oh, okay. So you lived in Cardiff before, didn't you?
Yes.
How come you've decided to move back?
Because my partner lives in Cardiff, my work's in Cardiff, so it's got to be Cardiff.
Okay. How do you think the relationship, obviously, you said your sister and your
mother live close to you. How will that affect your relationship with them, do you think?
I want to be sort of sad but happy because she could come down to Cardiff
to see me. It'd be difficult for all the enemy, but we still got that connection,
anyhow, so I could come up to her or she could come down to me, vice versa.
That's understandable.
So...
Be to move.
Sounds like you're desperate to go then.
I'm desperate to go, but my sister's not...
don't like the idea of me moving from Newport, so to say.
But I'm ready to do a new
chapter in my life.
Yeah, that's understandable.
So my last question is, is there anything you're looking forward to doing,
what's the one thing you can't wait to do when all the rules are gone?
Go out, meet new people and talk and talk.
Okay, yeah, I can see why that would be important to you.
I go to the pub.
But...
Have you found, actually I'm gonna ask you one more question on that, have you found
it easy to stay healthy during lockdown?
During lockdown, like...
Yes and no.
I don't drink all I mention alcohol.
Okay.
I stopped drinking alcohol after my birthday.
Hmm.
Then I got became well, because my blood pressure is up down like a yo-yo,
so I got became for having salt in my food.
Okay.
So I'm on blood pressure tablet, so I don't drink any alcohol,
but I will be drinking all Christmas anyhow.
It's a little bit difficult to stay healthy over lockdown, what did that mean for you?
Because I borderline diabetic, I will be diabetic next year.
Okay.
So I got became for why I eat more now.
So is it, was it struggling with eating healthy you struggled with, is it?
Yeah, yeah.
I buy you drink food more than anything else.
Okay, well I think that's it done, let you get back to George who obviously wants to speak to you.
I'm gonna stop the recording now, and I find the button, there we go.